## Juan De Fuca

### Location:

Gap winds in the Strait of Juan de Fuca occur throughout the strait located at the southern end of Vancouver Island in British Columbia, Canada and north of the Olympic Penninsual in Washington, USA.

> Approximate Location: {math}`48.75^{\circ} N, 124^{\circ} W`

#### Impacted Populations

Gap winds in in the Strait of Juan de Fuca impact large urban populations such as Victoria and, to a lesser extent, the greater Vancouver region. Shipping and fishing practices are impacted by the strong winds which can occur in the down the strait. 

Local Indigenous territories include; Pacheedaht, Makah, S'Klallam, Sc'ianew, Pauquichin, Lekwingen/Songhhes, Tulalip, the Te'mexw Treaty Association, and the Hul'qumi'num Treaty Group.

### Frequency and Timing

Gap winds in the Strait of Juan de Fuca occur year round. The greatest frequency of occurrence is in the winter months when across gap pressure gradients can be largest. Winds can blow either up-strait or down-strait depending on the orientiation of the pressure gradient.

### Formation 

The topography of the Strait 

Gap winds in the Strait of Juan de Fuca form either when the is mixing down of momentum from along-strait-oriented, geostrophic winds aloft (in the lower troposphere) and acclerations generated by an along-strait pressure gradient typically associated with synoptic troughs and the associated terrain indiced pressure modifications. Gap winds can reach speeds of 30-50 kt with gusts exceeding 80kt. 

### Synoptics

Gap winds are associated with short-wave trough from from the northwest

### References

Mass, C. F., Warner, M. D., & Steed, R. (2014). Strong Westerly Wind Events in the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Weather and Forecasting, 29(2), 445–465. https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-13-00026.1

Overland, J. E., & Walter, B. A. (1981). Gap winds in the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Monthly Weather Review, 109(10), 2221–2233. https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(1981)109<2221:GWITSO>2.0.CO;2

#### Disclaimer

Note that information on the local Indigneous territories is gathered solely from Native Land Digital and is only a list of territories in adjacent areas. See the map on the home page for a reference or visit native-land.ca